The Feed the Future Tanzania NAFAKA II Activity provides mechanization grants to households in an effort to reduce farm labor, generate additional income, and save time for women and youth. However, based on the activity’s Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) approach, it became apparent that there are fundamental problems and constraints that are holding these households back.



To address these challenges, the NAFAKA II Activity, funded by USAID and implemented by ACDI/VOCA, designed a time diary activity to improve household time management as well as uncover gender gaps that affect women such as unequal sharing of domestic roles and responsibilities, limited access to resources, and less joint decision-making at the household level.



The time diaries pilot began with 15 couples in an effort to test the hypothesis that if there is access to mechanization technology, then women’s on-farm labor will be reduced. Over the course of this year, the NAFAKA II Activity expanded the time diary exercise to more than 100 couples across the Southern Highlands who are either members of producer organizations (PO) or part of the village based agricultural program (VBAAs, i.e. “last-mile” input suppliers).



The time diary exercise confirmed the inequity of household time allocation and joint decision-making and revealed the disparity between the male and female household heads. The exercise revealed that on average, women work two to three additional hours per day compared to their male counterparts and 47 percent of women are considered to be “time-poor” (i.e. working more than 12 hours per day). Women spent 60 percent of their time doing domestic work as opposed to men who only spent only 27 percent of their time.



Amani and his wife Rehema are pictured at home. Amani said “Apart of jointly decision making helping each other work at home, eating together is also one of the habits we have now developed.



“I thank God meeting with NAFAKA people who taught us on household collaboration, and as couples, we consult more on anything that we want to do and make decisions jointly which has led to more love, unity and trust between us.”Amani Nzowa, 36



“I’m very grateful for these trainings and [I] benefited a lot. Unlike before, nowadays my husband helps on household activities, when I go to fetch water, he squeezes the dough, he fried pastries, I go to sell them. This year we have made a joint decision on our maize harvest.”Rhema Mbagwa, 34



Despite the successes of the time diaries,  it became clear that gender-based violence (GBV) was still a hindrance in reducing the gender gaps. The NAFAKA II Activity addressed this challenge in the scaling-up phase of the time diary exercise which included 124 participating couples by inviting a government of Tanzania GBV representative to speak with the women and explain how to seek support if and when issues of domestic violence arise. Participants also received training on eradicating GBV and some have begun sharing this training with other members within their community in conjunction with gender officers from police stations’ gender desks.



The time diary exercise is an important step in closing the gender gap for a healthy and productive society and for sustainable development in the agriculture sector in Tanzania.
    
                

 News  | Gender, Youth & Marginalized Communities