On Saturday, December 5, 2020, a grand decoration ceremony took place at the Palace of the Presidency of Burkina Faso as part of the commemoration of Burkina Faso’s National Independence Day. Chaired by His Excellency, Mr. Rock Marc Christian Kabore, President of Burkina Faso, this annual meeting was an opportunity for the nation to show its gratitude and celebrate the merits of individuals and legal entities for their dedication, hard work, and spirit of sacrifice to make Burkina Faso a more prosperous and peaceful nation.  



This year, ACDI/VOCA was decorated Knight of the Order of the Stallion. This distinction recognizes and honors ACDI/VOCA for our efforts and successes in Burkina Faso over the past nine years. This is the highest honorary order awarded to individuals and legal entities for eminent service, civil or military, to the nation. ACDI/VOCA has had a presence in Burkina Faso since 2011 and our work has spanned the USAID-funded Victory against Malnutrition (ViM) project (2011-2017) and the subsequent Victory against Malnutrition Plus (ViMPlus) project (2018-2023), which is currently ongoing. By honoring ACDI/VOCA, the nation of Burkina Faso expresses their greatest appreciation for our and our partners’ contributions towards improving food and nutritional security in Burkina Faso.



ViMPlus Chief of Party, Regis Terrien, receives an honorary pin on behalf of ACDI/VOCA.







During the ceremony, Mr. Regis Terrien, Chief of Party of the ViMPlus project, received this great distinction on behalf of ACDI/VOCA. First, he expressed his gratitude to the state of Burkina Faso and the people of Centre-Nord. Then, exhorting the ViMPlus team and its partners, Regis reminded them that this decoration is, above all else, an invitation to do even better to meet the expectations of the Burkinabe people.



The ViMPlus team is looking forward to doing exactly that. 



Regis Terrien alongside fellow awardees.




    
                

 News  | Food Security, Nutrition